Add proposal for scalar layout for constant buffers (#317)
microsoft/hlsl-specs: proposals/0023-scalar-constant-buffer-layout.md

<!-- {% raw %} -->

# Scalar constant buffer layout

* Proposal: [0023](0023-scalar-constant-buffer-layout.md)

> * Author(s): [Tobias Hector](https://github.com/tobski)

Author: @Alexander-Johnston you should probably add yourself as author at this point!

### HLSL Additions

A new `[bufferlayout("layout")]` attribute will be applicable to `cbuffer` and
`ConstantBuffer<struct>` definitions.

The `layout` may be either `legacy` or `scalar`.

To avoid incompatibility with existing code, when the `bufferlayout`
attribute is not applied to a constant buffer the layout will default to the
`legacy` layout.
The addition of this feature to HLSL will not have any effect on existing HLSL
code as a result.

#### Layouts

`legacy` layout uses the current packing rules described here:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3dhlsl/dx-graphics-hlsl-packing-rules.

`scalar` layout modifies the alignment rules for constant buffers, requiring
that each element is packed to align with it's scalar size.
For composite types such as vectors and matrices this requires that each
component be aligned individually to it's size, rather than the composite type
be aligned to it's total size.
The intention of these rules is to match the `scalarBlockLayout` in Vulkan,
providing easy compatibility between DXIL and SPIR-V layouts.

### Interchange Format Additions

This feature does not require any change to the DXIL language to represent

> scalar layouts.

Reviewer: This seems questionable...

I'd really like @tex3d to think on this. I suspect we could use the existing cbuffer load instructions to emulate the scalar layout but that may have limitations and impacts on things like the reflection data which we would need to surface the layout to users.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should attempt to implement scalar layout on top of the `CBufferLoadLegacy` DXIL op.

While it should be possible to map arbitrary accesses of the scalar layout to the legacy cbuffer load op, it would be ugly, and there would be complications (especially around dynamic indexing).  The reason the non-legacy cbuffer load (`CBufferLoad`) DXIL op exists is to support this kind of scalar layout in a future compiler version.  The intended mechanism was through a global switch, rather than a per-cbuffer (range) flag, however.

In any case, scalar layout is (as far as I can tell) the same as the layout we would use in structured buffer and what's described by the data layout, plus the default vector alignment modification DXC uses.

We already surface reflection information for structured buffers using the data layout rather than using the constant buffer offsets from the type annotation metadata.  It shouldn't be a stretch to use this for scalar-layout constant buffer reflection, but we will need to retain a flag for the cbuffer to guide the reflection code.

There is also code in DXC for marking constants as used for reflection which would be impacted, though that code is problematic (such as for offset array indexing) and needs a new approach anyway.

Regarding the existing "CBufferLoad" DXIL op (non-legacy version), we intended to retroactively disallow it on existing shader models, since we know that it's not HLK tested or well supported by existing drivers, reserving it for a new shader model once we had the HLK testing and driver support lined up.

There is also a proposal for `alignas` (#154), which would interact with this, requiring some solution for better-than-default alignment of fields and a corresponding reflection solution.

[bufferlayout("scalar")]
ConstantBuffer<MyStruct> MyBuffer ...
```

The following example demonstrates the difference in buffer alignment and size
between legacy and scalar layouts in DXIL.
Note that in legacy layout the float3 is aligned such that it begins in the
second 16 byte space, while in scalar layout it begins immediately after the
float2, with the 3rd element starting at offset 16.

```
[bufferlayout("legacy")]
cbuffer MyBuffer {
  float2 Foo;
  float3 Bar;
};

; cbuffer MyBuffer
; {
;
;   struct MyBuffer
;   {
;
;       float2 Foo;                                   ; Offset:    0
;       float3 Bar;                                   ; Offset:   16
;
;   } MyBuffer;                                       ; Offset:    0 Size:    28
;
; }

[bufferlayout("scalar")]
cbuffer MyBuffer {
  float2 Foo;
  float3 Bar;
};

; cbuffer MyBuffer
; {
;
;   struct MyBuffer
;   {
;
;       float2 Foo;                                   ; Offset:    0
;       float3 Bar;                                   ; Offset:    8
;
;   } MyBuffer;                                       ; Offset:    0 Size:    20
;
; }
```

As all values must be aligned to their scalar size, a scalar or element of a

> composite type may not lay across the 16 byte boundary.

Author: Is this supposed to say 4-byte? Or was this meant to refer to the legacy layout?

Reviewer: I think the language is probably a bit redundant. If scalar objects are aligned to their size for all scalar objects under 16-bytes, it would be impossible to cross a 16-byte boundary. HLSL doesn't have any larger than 8-bytes, but I don't think we need language about not crossing a 4-byte boundary because 64-bit types would be 8-byte aligned and will cross the 4-byte boundary between 8-byte alignments.

In the following example the double is aligned identically in both legacy and

> scalar layout, to 8 bytes, demonstrating this point.

Author: Depending on what the prior sentence was supposed to say this might need some more explanation.

;       double Bar;                                   ; Offset:   16
;
;   } MyBuffer;                                       ; Offset:    0 Size:    24
;
; }

[bufferlayout("scalar")]
cbuffer MyBuffer {
  float3 Foo;
  double Bar;
};

; cbuffer MyBuffer
; {
;
;   struct MyBuffer
;   {
;
;       float3 Foo;                                   ; Offset:    0
;       double Bar;                                   ; Offset:   16
;
;   } MyBuffer;                                       ; Offset:    0 Size:    24
;
; }
```

Matrix types in legacy layout are significantly different to scalar layout.
With legacy layout a matrix is laid out so each row is 16 byte aligned.
The exception to this is a matrix of doubles, in which case a double3x and
double4x matrix will have the rows aligned to 32 bytes.
With scalar layouts, as with vectors, each element is aligned to it's own scalar
size.
The following example demonstrates the differences in matrix layout by
showing the cbuffer loads and extractvalue instructions needed to load each
element of a 2x2 float matrix.
Note that the legacy example requires two 16 byte loads from the cbuffer, while

> the scalar example requires only one.

Author: As someone not entirely familiar with DXIL, it would be useful to explain here _why_ the legacy version needs an extra load, because it's not at all clear here.

Reviewer: The cbuffer storage for a matrix<T,2,2> is basically a vector<T,2>[2]. The packing rules for arrays in cbuffers are that each array index starts on a new "row" of the cbuffer. You can see this visualized here:
https://maraneshi.github.io/HLSL-ConstantBufferLayoutVisualizer/?visualizer=MYIwrgZhCmBOAE0AeBDAtgBwDbXgbwCh5j4IsB7FAFwCYkb41qBuAgX2aA

Author: Ah thanks, that does help quite a bit - would be good to get this explanation added to the proposal!

```
[bufferlayout("legacy")]
cbuffer MyBuffer {
  float2x2 Foo;
};

  %loadOne = call %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 @dx.op.cbufferLoadLegacy.f32(i32 59, %dx.types.Handle %cbufferHandle, i32 0)
  %elemOne = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadOne, 0
  %elemTwo = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadOne, 1
  %loadTwo = call %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 @dx.op.cbufferLoadLegacy.f32(i32 59, %dx.types.Handle %cbufferHandle, i32 1)
  %elemThree = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadTwo, 0
  %elemFour = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadTwo, 1

[bufferlayout("scalar")]
cbuffer MyBuffer {
  float2x2 Foo;
};

  %loadOne = call %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 @dx.op.cbufferLoadLegacy.f32(i32 59, %dx.types.Handle %cbufferHandle, i32 0)
  %elemOne = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadOne, 0
  %elemTwo = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadOne, 1
  %elemThree = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadThree, 2
  %elemFour = extractvalue %dx.types.CBufRet.f32 %loadFour, 3

```

### SPIR-V Support

> SPIR-V already supports this scalar layout proposal through the

Author: nit:

```suggestion
SPIR-V already supports this scalar layout proposal, as exercised by the
```

(noting that SPIR-V can express this natively, the Vulkan extension just makes it valid to use with Vulkan)
